Add EIP: Non-Sellable Tokens (#6774)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-6774.md

---
eip: 6774
title: Non-Sellable Tokens
description: Prevent speculation on NFTs by replacing transfers by a barter mechanism
author: Cédric Nicolas (@cedric-n-icolas), Casey <casey@logion.community>, Kerel Verwaerde (@NSTKerel), Matthieu Chassagne <Matthieu@amcconsults.com>, Perrin (@pgrandne), Rafael Fitoussi (@fi2c), Raphael (@RaphaelHardFork), Virgil (@virgilea2410)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-6774-non-sellable-tokens/13528
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2023-03-15
requires: 712, 721
---

## Abstract

> This EIP is an extension of [ERC-721](./eip-721.md) to create non-sellable tokens (NST). It proposes a strong restriction on transfers in order to prevent speculation on token price while maintaining the possibility of transfers, transfers are performed in a barter way (send to receive or receive to send) in an ecosystem controlled by the creator.

Reviewer: I'd appreciate a tiny bit of technical detail about _how_ this proposal prevents selling.

## Motivation

> Interest for soulbound tokens (SBT) in the Ethereum community still growing since the V. Buterin idea publication (Soulbound, 2022-01-26), highlighting the non-transferability (non-)features to prevent, _in fine_, speculation of the token. While a lot of propositions emerged for implementation of SBT, the non-transferability is often too restrictive and requires a certain level of centralization, especially when users want to transfer a SBT between two owned accounts. Thus SBTs are way more fitted for account-bounded properties such as reputation, voting rights, privileges, ...

Reviewer: Please remove external links (yes, references by title and date are still external references :wink:)

> In case of transferable items which cannot be sellable, SBTs can fit, but they require a strong level of centralization as transfer are restricted by the token creator (or the community in case of DAO managed SBT). Here some examples of possibles NSTs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case of transferable items which cannot be sold, SBTs can fit, but they require a strong level of centralization as transfer are restricted by the token creator (or the community in case of DAO managed SBT). Here some examples of possible NSTs:
```

- Company Benefits: A company could be giving out benefits to its employees in a closed environment its controls (hence being able to freely add in or remove redeemable benefits).

NSTs propose a way to enforce users to perform barter of tokens between two authorized tokens in order to maintain a value equivalence in the exchange and so reduce the risk of speculation associated with an one way transfer. NSTs would provide a solution for transferring non-valuable tokens between projects based on their true value instead of their perceived/ speculated value without leveraging a third party.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "REQUIRED", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

### Overview

An approval mechanism is REQUIRED before performing barters between two tokens, belonging to the same or different NST contracts (see [Permissonless barter](#permissionless-barter)).

Every contract compliant with this EIP MUST implements this transfer mechanism:

1. UserA signs a message taking up the terms of the barter
2. UserB accepts and concludes the barter by calling the `barter` function

> ```mermaid

Reviewer: I can't promise this will render into anything useful. If it doesn't, please replace it with a rendered diagram (preferably SVG.)

    participant UserB
    UserA-->>UserA: Sign barter terms
    note right of UserA: Message:<br/>- BarterTerms<br/>- UserA signature
    UserA-->>UserB: Send off-chain barter message
    UserB->>+NST B: call barter(message)
    NST B->>+NST A: call transferFor(message)
    NST A->>NST A: check UserA signature and increase nonce
    NST A->>-UserB: transfer NST A tokenID: 2
    NST B->>-UserA: transfer NST B tokenID: 5
```

### NST

#### Methods

In the following, the `BarterTerms` struct are defined as follows:

```solidity
struct Component {
    address tokenAddr;
    uint256 tokenId;
}

struct BarterTerms {
    Component bid;
    Component ask;
    uint256 nonce;
    address owner;
    uint48 deadline;
}
```

See [Define the barter terms](#define-the-barter-terms) section for precisions on this struct.

##### transferFor

Verifies signature following the [EIP-712](./eip-712.md) procedure, increases the nonce of `data.owner` and transfers the `data.bid.tokenId` to `to` account.

This function MUST be called only by authorized NST contracts, the call MUST occur when users are calling the `barter` function.

> NOTE: using `ECDSA.sol`(`v4.7.3` at least) and `EIP-712.sol` libraries from OpenZeppelin are very RECOMMENDED for signature verifications, verification only based on `ecrecover` SHOULD NOT be used (see the Solidity documentation, Mathematical and Cryptographic Functions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

You can make a note of ECDSA problems in the security considerations section, but generally we prefer to avoid implementation details in the specification section.

- `safeTransferFrom(address,address,uint256)` (`0x42842e0e`)
- `transferFrom(address,address,uint256)` (`0x23b872dd`)

## Rationale

This EIP has been designed to leverage existing features of the [ERC-721](./eip-721.md) such as `approve/allowance` and `Transfer` events and leave the full control on the implementation.

### Permissionless barter

Tokens created compliant with this EIP MUST design authorizations between tokens on both `barter` and `transferFor` functions to keep the non-sellability of tokens. We explored cases of permissionless or one-way permissionless barter, in both cases it opened up the possibility of a bypassed one-way transfer.

#### Fully permissionless

Allowing any barter type between NSTs make no such sense to prevent the non-sellability of the token. Any smart contract could bypass this kind of transfer by creating a valueless NST to barter with others. In this case, replacing transfer functions would be useless.

The value equivalence is so maintained by tokens creators as a whitelist, keeping these authorisations at the contract level is important and would help create a network of barterable NSTs.

> Based on value equivalence we leverage the game theory to enforce the non-sellability instead of stronger restrictions or centralization which would lead to higher code complexity and poor interoperability. Indeed, the strong counterpart at the transfer made NSTs highly illiquid to be subject to a sale on a marketplace or by OTC agreement.

Reviewer: Abbreviations should be expanded the first time they are used.

#### One way permissionless

##### On `transferFor`

Leaving this method permissionless would lead to the possibility to self transfer the token to any other address, without a barter.

##### On `barter`

Using `barter` without restriction opens up the risk of unwanted barters between non-equivalent NSTs. Thus any valueless NST could be used to perform a one-way transfer.

### Multi NST contract barter

Implementing a many-to-many NST contract is quite impossible as the barter occurs at the contract level, therefore implement such feature require to call and write on each NST contract. The gas usage for such a feature would be too expensive.

### Register of allowed NST

Creating a universal register for barter allowances between NST contracts (like the [ERC-1820](./eip-1820.md)) would be hard to maintain and easy to bypass.

### Third party protocol

Implementing a service for barter NFT is already existent (see Sudoswap OTC). Such a service still enable one-way transfer through ERC-721 properties and thus not prevent the sellability of the token.

## Backwards Compatibility

> Excepted disabled methods specified in [Contract interface](#contract-interface), this EIP is backward compatible with [ERC-721](./eip-721.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other than the disabled methods specified in [Contract interface](#contract-interface), this EIP is backward compatible with [ERC-721](./eip-721.md).
```

## Test Cases

> The reference implementation includes unit tests written using Foundry

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The reference implementation includes unit tests written using Foundry.
```

## Reference Implementation

> [Implementations examples](../assets/eip-6774/) have been designed for this proposal.

Reviewer: Unfortunately our renderer doesn't like linking to directories, so you'll need to link to a specific file. One option that works fairly well for big reference implementations is creating a `README.md` and linking to that.
